This is an interview with area court director
Frank Keenan by Lisa Walker on the 23rd of
November, 1989, at the Hidalgo International
Bridge concerning the war on drugs. In the
interest of accumulating knowledge, I'm asking
you to donate this tape to me or to the Texas A&M Oral
History Collection at the University Archives.
Is that OK with you? Yes. It's quite OK. Great.
First of all, I'd like to hear a little bit about
yourself. What's your personal background and
education? Well, I grew up in Detroit, Michigan.
I'm a graduate of Wayne State University. I have a
master's degree from Eastern Michigan
University. I've been in customs since 1965. I was
an inspector in Detroit. In 1972, I went to
headquarters and was there, except for a couple of
overseas assignments. I was there continuously
until about 1985. And I was an operations officer
in Houston, Texas. And I've been here for the last
two years as a port director.
Wow. You've worked all over the place. Okay, let's
get started. First of all, I'd like to ask you, what
was the Customs Service's role in the war on drugs
through the different administrations,
starting with Carter and ending with President?
Well, my involvement in the war on drugs really
started in 1973. That was when President Nixon
began to take a look and saw that United States was
having a major drug problem and every president
since then has tried to commit resources to some
kind of war on drugs.
Do you want to know what our role is? Yes sir.
Customs is only one of many agencies involved in
this. We see the war on drugs as a multi agency
multinational operation customs is
trying to control have jurisdiction on the
borders airports and seaports at the ports of
entry themselves when one gets away from the ports
of entry that it becomes under the jurisdiction of
border patrol the Drug Enforcement
Administration, and other local and federal
agencies. They're only really a small part of the
total . And has that role changed through the
administrations, or has it changed? I haven't
seen any change at all from one administration to
the other. There was a slight difference between
the Nixon and Carter administrations I think
maybe enforcement was downplayed somewhat
during the Carter administration and then picked
up again quite dramatically at least the at least
verbally under Reagan and then it's continued
under Bush I haven't seen any difference at all
between the Reagan administration and Bush
administration except that President Bush has
done what other presidents have tried to do, and
that is to appoint somebody to be in charge of the
total operation,
Mr. Bennett. But we haven't actually seen any
action from that office yet. I think things are
still in the planning stage. They haven't
actually implemented what he has planned. Oh, you
were reading my mind. That was my next question. It
was about the drug czar and if that's cut down and
the overlapping of duties between the agencies. I
haven't seen any difference. We're still turf
conscious, unfortunately. But it hasn't
changed. I worked between 1973 and about 1985 I
worked overseas a good part of my time with other
agencies, DEA. A lot of the agents, DEA agents I
worked with overseas were formal customs agents.
And there was always rivalry then. There's
rivalry now. I hope that Bennett can change that,
because I think it's really counterproductive.
My attitude is... My personal attitude is that I
don't care who stops it as long as it's stopped. And
I'm perfectly happy to see DEA take the credit or
Border Patrol or anybody else. Unfortunately,
very
few law enforcement officers feel that way. They
want the credit for themselves, and they don't
want to share it. I understand wanting credit when
credit is needed. It's possible that Bennett,
once we begin to implement these strategies and
plans, it may be this way.
And I hope that. OK. Coming onto somewhat of a
different subject, the VA chief, John Laws, was
quoted in a time magazine as saying, we want to talk
about slowing down the flow of cocaine into the
United States. we should think more in terms of
demand reduction. Now, besides the zero
tolerance policy, how is Customs approaching the
demand reduction,
actually? Or as Customs? Well, we're acting on
behalf of the United States government in other
areas besides enforcement.
Our officers in every court, in every district
probably in this country, go out on their own time
and on government time and talk to school children
of all ages. We've instituted a program where we
talk to, first of all, the students to try to
reinforce the general perception that they
should stay away from drugs. We do about the same as
the other agencies in that respect. We also have a
program that's
asking American citizens and residents of the
United States to help us in the drug war by
reporting anything that they think might be drug
related. If they see something suspicious, an
airplane unloading in a remote airfield, and look
suspicious in a boat in some harbor or someplace,
then if they think it's drugs, then they have a
responsibility, we think. And we encourage them
to call us and tell us. And we'll dispatch
immediately officers and equipment to the area to
try to intercept it. Is that the B alert? That's the
B alert, yes. There are rewards for that.
Generally, the attitude we've taken is, I've had
it for a long time, and I think we take it as a
service. We believe that we can't do it by
ourselves. We can't seal off the borders. We can't
stand hand in hand across the whole Mexican border
and also across the seaports and airports and so
on. It's impossible. The only way we're ever going
to stop this is to...
stop the demand. And that takes everybody.
Everybody has to be involved in that, not only the
small part of it. Parents have to warn their kids
against drugs. Brothers have to warn their little
sisters and brothers against drugs and so on.
Everybody has to be involved. I don't see that
happening in the
near future. Going back to zero tolerance, zero
tolerance, as I understand it, is the policy of
arresting any person and or seizing his property
that brings in any amount of illegal drugs. Is this
policy still enforced, and is it effective? Well,
it's not exactly as you describe it. It never has
been. Zero tolerance is an attempt to
make of illegal drugs in any quantities
responsible for their illegal action. Somebody
who smokes marijuana is doing it illegally.
Whether it's one ounce or half an ounce or a gram or
whether it's a ton, it's illegal. Zero tolerance
simply means that if we find it, and we will seize
the conveyance in which it was transported, in
most cases as an automobile or an airplane or a
boat.
In recent months, if the person who owns the
vehicle
has no knowledge, if he can satisfy the government
that He didn't know the person who had the drugs
actually had it. He was not responsible, such as a
rental agency, or if a parent lets a son or daughter
take a car, or if they take it without permission,
if obviously they can't control them 24 hours a
day. There are provisions that the property, that
is the conveyance, is returned to the owner. but
not without penalty. We think that by we, I mean the
government. The United States Customs Service
did not invent zero tolerance. We didn't make it
up. We only enforced it because we were told to
right down from the White House. We're an arm of the
executive branch of government. We do what we're
told. And we do it with as much energy as we can. And
when they say it's against the law to bring in any
measurable amount of drugs in the United States,
and if we find it, then we're going to have to bring
it along. And do you see any changes between Reagan
and Bush in the disenforcement policy? No, I don't
think so. I think Bush
is just as strong against it. As I said before, it
It's not a criminal, in most cases, a criminal
proceeding. Serial tolerance, at least the
current interpretation of it, is a monetary
penalty in lieu of seizing the conveyance. We may
hold up the conveyance for a while, but in most
cases, they can petition and get it back. if
they can satisfy us
well then we can then we will seize it and keep it
there a lot there are a lot of size to this coin
though because Most people don't own their cars
free and clear. They buy them on time. The lien
holders have an opportunity to get the vehicle
back.
In many cases, they do. In most cases, they do.
Rental agencies get them back without too many
problems. In most cases, the The cars that we've
seized for either zero tolerance or for
substantial amounts of
drugs have been junkered. Cars aren't worth
anything anyway. They're worth a few hundred
dollars at best. It's almost as if they know that
they may get caught. And if they do get caught,
they're not going to lose a paid for valuable car. I
never thought of it that way. We have a custom
service. We seize cars all the time out here under
zero tolerance and also under substantial
amounts. And very few of the cars are actually
forfeited to the government. Very few cars that
have any value on them. Because the ones that have
value are they have a lien against them, in which
case the lien holder gets them back. or borrowed or
rented or in some other way not owned by the person.
The ones that seem to be owned outright are 10 years
old, 150,000 miles on it, and not worth anything
anymore.
According to some estimates that I've read, at
least a third of all the heroin and marijuana used
in the United States is supplied through Mexico.
Do you think that this figure accurately reflects
the Mexican drug threat? And do you think that this
drug threat is increasing, or has it decreased
over time,
or not? I agree with the statistic, with the
figure. I think it's about right. In fact, it may
even be higher than that. I've heard that we get
about 80% that we get in this country are either
originate or are transferred through Mexico.
80%. They don't grow cocaine in Mexico, but a lot of
it comes through Mexico. They do grow opium poppy.
We haven't seen much heroin here lately, but it's
only because Cocaine is now the most popular drug.
They grow a lot of marijuana in Mexico, as you know.
And we see more marijuana than anything, even
though the United States is now growing enough
marijuana in its home that it probably doesn't
need to be imported. But the new threat, from what I
understand, is something that's just as
dangerous, probably more dangerous even, than
crack cocaine. And that is a crystalline
substance that's derived from
methamphetamines. It's coming from East Asia.
It's coming from Korea. We haven't seen any of that
here. yet, but if there's money in it, the Mexicans
and the Latin Americans and South Americans are
going to be involved in it. Methamphetamine is
what they used to call speed. And this new form of it
that's just been discovered out of Korea is
finding its way into Hawaii. It's become already a
major drug problem in Hawaii. And we're afraid
it's going to find its way in the west coast and then
the rest of the country. It gets back to this demand
thing. It doesn't seem to matter what we do.
There's always an element of the population that
wants to do drugs.
They want to do crap even though they know that it's
dangerous and lethal. There are kids and young
adults who want to do it. And the fact that we say
it's bad, maybe even makes them want to do it, but I
don't know why they want to do it. As long as that
demand is there, there's going to be people who
want to make money, and they're going to survive.
So you think that some of these people, or the
majority of these people, know that it's bad for
them, but they do it anyway, or... I think they all
do. I think they all do. They all know it's bad, but I
think the peer pressure is such that it's almost
irresistible.
It's also glamorized, not so much as it used to be,
but it's glamorized to some extent in movies, in
music, in TV programs.
When
the football player is found to have a drug habit
and is suspended from football and maybe even
prosecuted by the law, what happens is that he gets
put in a hospital or into a cell And
he gets himself cleaned out one way or another,
whether he wants to or not. It happens. And then he
goes on TV and becomes an example of somebody who
went through the drugs but was able to get off it and
now is clean and being productive. And I think it
gives the message that people, the kids and
others, that, so what if I get hooked on it? I can get
off it too. And they can put a little list of
celebrities as long as your arm. Instead, they all
were in it. They all were addicted. And they all got
off it. And if they can do it, I can do it.
Of course, they don't all get off because a lot of
them die while they're still on it. I think it sends
a bad image. If I had my way, when Joe Hero gets
busted for drugs, part of his sentence ought to be
that he doesn't talk to the press, media, doesn't
write a book, doesn't appear on TV, and he sure as
hell doesn't do any community service to put
himself in an area where he can talk to kids who he
might influence. To me, he ought to be invisible
for the next five years of his life.
I think about this a lot, and I really believe that
we do more harm than good when we parade these
celebrities in front of the cameras and let them
tell their stories. There's a country singer, and
I can't even think of his name, Every time I see him
on TV, on an interview, he's talking about when he
was in jail.
And he treats it like it was summer camp. And he got
all these people gathered around him in an
interview situation. And he's talking about the
good old days when he was in prison.
And it's a stupid image. for them to be showing.
He's laughing about it. Here he is, a
multi-millionaire country and western singer,
and the message that he's giving is that he was a
criminal, and he went to prison, he reformed, but
what they don't say is that he's one of the few
people who has this talent that he could cash in on,
just like the football player. How many people can
play professional sports? going back
to
the border control operation alliance was a 226
million dollar operation to fortify our borders
with high-tech equipment and manpower and either
of your reports received this day and if they did
was it effective we haven't received any in
customs as far as I know. We're still short-handed
here by at least 20 offices. We haven't received
any assistance since
this thing was publicized. None. I can't get
desks, chairs to sit on. I can't get equipment.
Because every time I ask for equipment, my
district director says we don't have any
equipment money. Every time we try to get
personnel,
we're in some kind of a freeze, a hiring freeze. Or
we're told that we've recruited people. They're
in the pipeline. But unfortunately, it takes
sometimes 18 months or two years in the time to
recruit somebody until he actually puts on a
uniform No, I haven't
seen anything at all that would indicate that
we're getting any benefit from this. And what
about the high-tech equipment that I've read
about, like the balloons with the radar dishes and
the helicopters and the airplanes? Well, yes,
there are those things. How effective they are, I
don't know.
We have just about every border port on the Mexican
border, and most of them have a little
international airport. We have one here in
McAllen.
We have people who are working with our officer
enforcement investigators. We have uniformed
officers as well who are working, trying to
identify smuggling planes.
I don't know of any incident when we had
called the air wing US Customs and had them
scramble and go after somebody. I don't know what
they do. I know we've got planes, and I know we've
got pilots. But I really have never seen any
evidence of them down here. We read about them from
time to time. Usually when we do read about them,
it's because one of them crashed.
But
as far as the other technology, yes, I think these
aerostat balloons, one is up along the Rio Grande
near the Big Bend area. Another one is in the
process of being great. In fact, it's already been
inflated, I think, at Rio Grande City. The one at
Rio Grande City, when it's operational, should be
able to look all the way to about 150 miles in any
direction, both on the ground and in the air. And so
that would cover the whole border probably from
Zapata east all the way to Brownsville in the Gulf.
How effective is that? I don't know. I hope it
really does a job.
I have a question here about air smuggling. You
talked about the air and what it is is in many of my
sources air smuggling was mentioned as a primary
role of trafficking. How is Customs tackling that
problem and how could the effort be improved?
Well, we don't see air smugglers per se at our
international airport because anybody
smuggling in an airplane is probably not going to
come into an airport and report to customs if
they're arriving from Mexico. It's possible some
of the planes that do come in have small amounts
hidden on the airplane, but we have run a lot of
operations on private aircraft, so we've
literally We've had mechanics literally take
planes apart to look in to see if there were any
drugs. And we haven't found any drugs at all during
those operations. That doesn't mean that they're
not coming in because we found a couple of things.
Number one, the
pilots tend to stick together. people in the
private aircraft business, whether they're
mechanics or they run these little air terminals
or gas, gasoline operations, refueling
operations or small terminals at these airports,
they all know each other. And I have a feeling that
within a few hours of the time we hire an aircraft
mechanic would look in airframes on a regular
basis. Everybody knew about it who flew an
airplane. Everybody. And certainly the
smugglers would know as well as the
non-smugglers. That's not to say the most part.
The smugglers only say what the word gets out very
quickly.
On the other hand, the border, once you get west of
Hidalgo, in the Star County and up toward Laredo,
and then northwest of Laredo along the border.
It's quite remote, more so than a map of Texas would
indicate. Look at a map, it looks like there's
little towns off here, but there really aren't.
There are a lot of wide open spaces. And every
ranch, and we're talking about some big ranches,
have private airstrips. There are uncharted
airstrips we call clandestine probably on both
sides of the border because smuggling not only
comes north but also goes south. People smuggle
drugs northward, then they smuggle consumer
products electronics,
radios, TVs, things that are very expensive and
high rate of duty from the United States and New
Mexico. So it's two ways.
Maybe these aerostat balloons will stop the kind
of trafficking that we all know happens. These
airplanes come in. They fly low.
under the present radar out of a air control area so
that unless there's radar looking, we don't even
know they're coming in. They're required by law to
report when they enter the United States
airspace, but if they're carrying contraband, of
course you're not going to do it. I really think
that these aerostat balloons will make a big
difference because They will see planes. The
trouble, of course, is that you can't tell if a
plane is going to cross the border until it
actually does so.
They can appear to be on radar, appear to be
following the border, staying on the Mexican
side, and then all of a sudden turn northward. And
by the time that our radar operators pick it up and
say, hey, a plane just came across. It's too late to
go after him because he's already probably going
to land in one of these out-of-the-way airports,
and we're not going to be able to find him anywhere.
I hope that's wrong, but that's sort of the way I
feel. It's hard. That's our biggest threat, I
think, probably with just almost impossible
control. So other than the Airstat balloon, what
other technological advances would you like to
see here in McAllen?
I wish we could find some electronic means of
looking into cargo
so we didn't have to unload trucks to find the
contraband. The only way you can look into a cargo
truck to see if there are drugs hidden either among
the cargo or in the conveyance itself, that is in
false walls of the truck, is on the ocean. And it
takes two or three hours. There's damage done to
the product. And we have to do this.
gadget that could, a fluoroscope or x-ray, that
could look into it and that you could tell whether
there was anything going on there, that would
probably be
a real help to us. But I think the technology is
probably available for that sort of thing, but
it's so expensive it's only people can afford it,
people like the Saudi Arabians. They have those
sorts of things on a test basis. I understand
there's a big machine made in France that Saudi
Arabia had bought to take a look at cargo coming
into their country. But
as far as I know, it hasn't been effective enough to
be cost effective as far as I know. I think they'd
pay almost anything to do the work. But they're not
reliable. But I remember for years Custom Service
has tried to find things that would save them time
in looking for dope. We've had electronic
sniffing machines at airports. We've done major
tests in the United States at airports. Ones that
would sniff suitcases that came through it from
there, across it from there. We had one machine,
yes, that would show an alarm that there were drugs
in it. We had another machine that we tested that
would, it was hidden inside a
tabletop or counter like in an airport. passenger
arrives from overseas and picks up his bags. And
the first person he talks to is an immigration
officer. He sort of bellies up to this counter on
the other side of which is an immigration officer
and hands him his passport. There was a machine
that supposedly would sniff this person as he got
close and could tell whether he had been handling
or had any on him These gadgets were so unreliable
that I reckon they gave up on all of them because I
haven't heard anything about them in a long time.
I'm beginning to think maybe there is no
way to really look except just tearing things
apart and looking with the naked eye. Detected
dogs do that. That's probably our best Yeah,
but I don't think they worked out because they
don't have them now. I remember when they were
catching
them 10 years ago. inspector training or any
training would you improve in order to make the
Customs Service more efficient in combating
drugs on Mexican
plants? What aspects of inspector training would
you improve in order to make the Customs Service
more efficient at combating drugs on Mexican
plants? Well, I think the most important thing we
can teach new inspectors would be, I don't even
know if it's something we can teach. It's a matter
of attitude.
We need inspectors who have a commitment to law
enforcement and a dedication to public service.
And I don't think you can teach that to people.
There are other kinds of people you go after. but
people take jobs for all kinds of reasons.
Those reasons being probably
important, but they're not important to a lot of
people. A lot of people take the job because they
pay well, they're steady, in an area where minimum
wage is really the real problem. You have people
who... After a few years, we made very good money as
customs officers. There was a certain amount of
stature involved. They recognized members of the
community.
But if I could teach them anything, I would want to
teach them
just dedication, integrity, integrity,
integrity. And I just don't know if you can keep
your mind. We hope we get those people and we
reinforce it, those who haven't, I think. Because
there are a lot of temptations out
here. They claim there are temptations. I've been
in the service 25 years and no one's ever offered me
that. And yet... If it happens, I know it happens,
because this happened right here in this
apartment. I was thinking about
integrity. I do have a question here about it. I'm
sorry. Oh, no, it's fine. So you do see that the
integrity is a real, the perceived problem is a
real problem. How much of this do you see, and has it
increased, the rate of which? And what do you think
is the main cause of the integrity problem? Well, I
see integrity as a problem. I don't know what you
mean by a real problem. I think the percentage of
officers who
who do things illegal out here is very, very small.
I really do. I think it's a problem. But in the whole
scheme of custom, it's a minor problem. We've had a
couple of people arrested here, inspectors. The
reason I'm saying this is I'm trying to answer the
question about what causes it, and I don't know
what causes it. Since I've been here in Hidalgo,
and this is a big port, I have to go on record as
saying this is a major port of entry, even though
nobody ever heard of Hidalgo, who's not from this
area. The port of Hidalgo is one of the biggest
ports on the Mexican border. There are maybe two or
three in the whole border that are bigger. We have
about
100 employees here, customs,
of whom, well not 100, we have about 90, of whom 75
are inspectors, and we're about 20 short from what
we are right now. Immigration service has another
50. The agriculture has another 25. We bring in $50
million a year in revenue. We have a payroll of, I
don't know what our payroll is, but our officers,
our 80 officers, between them, earned over a
million and a half dollars just in overtime last
year. And the overtime is about $20.
less than 10% of their total earnings. So it's a
major operation. Getting back to what I started to
say, since I've been here, we've lost about seven
or eight officers for what I would call breaches of
integrity. Integrity lapses, or however you want
to say it. Of those,
Only three were actually indicted for criminal
activity. Every one of those three
was targeted by Internal Affairs because
somebody called them and said, I think this guy is
doing drugs or is dishonest or is doing something
illegal. They don't target them unless somebody
calls and tells them that they're suspicious. And
they respond. In every one of these cases, two of
the three cases, they gave these people who they
had been told are dirty, as we say, they gave them
the opportunity They said, well, we'll find out if
they are guilty. And they gave them opportunities
to break the law. And they did. Two of them did. Two
of them actually took bribes. One of whom has been
convicted.
I shouldn't say they actually took them. I should
say they allegedly took them. One of whom has been
convicted of two counts of bribery. The other is
about to go to trial on the same charges plus
others, plus other charges. All the charges stem
from the investigation conducted by the Attorney
of Affairs then providing the opportunity for
these guys to break the law and they broke the law.
Perfectly legal. I'm not saying this in any
derogatory sense. I'm in favor of this kind of law
enforcement because we find out who the dishonest
people are. The third of these three was
acquitted.
on drugs, on bribery, it was on passing an illegal
alien. Now, he was acquitted of that in court, and
he's trying to get his job back. I don't know
whether he will or not, but I have no opinion on
whether he should be coming back or not. The other
five of that group of eight resigned in every case
under some kind of suspicion,
in most cases because they were consorting with
known criminals, even though there was no
specific charges against them. One person
resigned because he was offered a bribe, didn't
take the bribe, but didn't report to internal
affairs that he was a prophet of God. And so they
confronted him with that and then he decided to
resign and then go through trial and so on. But all
of these, if in trying to sort out what these people
all had in common, it's difficult without
making almost making an ethnic slur because all of
them are locals. All of them are Mexican
Americans. All of them have contacts on both sides
of the border. All of them grew up in this area.
And all of them, as I say, have friends, relatives,
some of whom have contacts with It's
not
to say that every local person is a potential
criminal. It's not to say at all, but that seems to
be the problem.